Release 2.18.0 (#7596)
timescale/timescaledb: CHANGELOG.md

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.18.0 (2025-01-16)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since
the 2.17.2 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next
available opportunity.

**Features**
* #6901: Add hypertable support for transition tables.
* #7104: Hypercore table access method.
* #7271: Push down `order by` in real-time continuous aggregate queries.
* #7295: Support `alter table set access method` on hypertable.
* #7341: Vectorized aggregation with grouping by one fixed-size by-value compressed column (such as arithmetic types).
* #7390: Disable custom `hashagg` planner code.
* #7411: Change parameter name to enable hypercore table access method.
* #7412: Add [GUC](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/acronyms.html#:~:text=GUC) for the `hypercore_use_access_method` default.
* #7413: Add GUC for segmentwise recompression.
* #7433: Add support for merging chunks.
* #7436: Add index creation on `order by` columns.
* #7443: Add hypercore function and view aliases.
* #7455: Support `drop not null` on compressed hypertables.

> * #7458: Support vecorized aggregation with aggregate `filter` clauses that are also vectorizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #7458: Support vectorized aggregation with aggregate `filter` clauses that are also vectorizable.
```

* #7482: Optimize recompression of partially compressed chunks.

> * #7486: Prevent building against postgres versions with broken ABI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #7486: Prevent building against PostgreSQL versions with broken ABI.
```

* #7521: Add optional `force` argument to `refresh_continuous_aggregate`.
* #7528: Transform sorting on `time_bucket` to sorting on time for compressed chunks in some cases.
* #7565: Add hint when hypertable creation fails.
* #7587: Add `include_tiered_data` parameter to `add_continuous_aggregate_policy` API.

**Bugfixes**
* #7378: Remove obsolete job referencing `policy_job_error_retention`.
* #7409: Update `bgw_job` table when altering procedure.
* #7410: Fix the `aggregated compressed column not found` error on aggregation query.
* #7426: Fix `datetime` parsing error in chunk constraint creation.
* #7432: Verify that the heap tuple is valid before using.

> * #7434: Fixes the segfault when internally setting the replica identity for a given chunk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* #7434: Fix the segfault when internally setting the replica identity for a given chunk.
```

* #7488: Emit error for transition table trigger on chunks.
* #7514: Fix the error: `invalid child of chunk append`.

> * #7517: Fixes the performance regression on `cagg_migrate` procedure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* #7517: Fix the performance regression on the `cagg_migrate` procedure.
```

* #7527: Restart scheduler on error.
* #7557: Fix null handling for in-memory tuple filtering.

> * #7566: Improve transaction check in CAgg refresh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #7566: Improve transaction check in CAGG refresh.
```

* #7584: Fix NaN-handling for vectorized aggregation.

**Thanks**
* @bharrisau for reporting the segfault when creating chunks.

> * @k-rus for suggesting the improvement to add a hint when hypertable creation fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* @k-rus for suggesting that we add a hint when hypertable creation fails.
```

* @pgloader for reporting the issue in an internal background job.

> * @staticlibs for sending Pull Request to improve the transaction check in CAgg refresh.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* @staticlibs for sending the pull request that improves the transaction check in CAgg refresh.
```

> * @staticlibs for sending the pull request that improves the transaction check in CAgg refresh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* @staticlibs for sending the pull request that improves the transaction check in CAGG refresh.
```

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.18.0 (2025-01-23)

> This release improves `group by` performance of compressing data and filters,
> introduces the ability to add secondary indexes, and contains the highly upvoted
> community request of transition table support. We recommend that you upgrade at the
> next available opportunity.
> 
> **Highlighted features in this release**
> * TAM
> * Significant performance improvements for aggregations using a `group by` with one column
> and/or using a filter clause. SIMD
> * Transition tables
> 
> **Dropping support for Bitnami images**
> After the recent change in Bitnami’s [LTS support policy](https://github.com/bitnami/containers/issues/75671),
> we are no longer building Bitnami images for TimescaleDB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This release introduces the ability to add secondary indexes, improves group by performance of compressing data and filters, and contains the highly upvoted community request of transition table support. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

## Features
* The ability to add secondary indexes for columns in a compressed Hypertable with the `hypercore_tam` engine.
* Significant performance improvements through vectorization (`SIMD`) for aggregations using a group by with one column and/or using a filter clause for querying compressed data.
* Hypertables support triggers for transition tables, which is one of the most upvoted community feature requests. Both compressed and uncompressed Hypertables support the new triggers.

## Dropping support for Bitnami images
After the recent change in Bitnami’s [LTS support policy](https://github.com/bitnami/containers/issues/75671), we are no longer building Bitnami images for TimescaleDB.

## Deprecation Notice

We deprecating the following parameters, functions, procedures and views. These will remove them with the next major release of TimescaleDB. Please find the replacements in the table below:

| Deprecated | Replacement | Type |
| --- | --- | --- |
| decompress_chunk | convert_to_rowstore | Procedure |
| compress_chunk | convert_to_columnstore | Prodcedure | 
| add_compression_policy | add_columnstore_policy | Function | 
| remove_compression_policy | remove_columnstore_policy | Function | 
| hypertable_compression_stats | hypertable_columnstore_stats | Function | 
| chunk_compression_stats | chunk_columnstore_stats | Function | 
| hypertable_compression_settings | hypertable_columnstore_settings | View | 
| chunk_compression_settings | chunk_columnstore_settings | View | 
| compression_settings | columnstore_settings | View | 
| timescaledb.enable_columnstore | timescaledb.compress | Parameter | 
| timescaledb.segmentby | timescaledb.compress_segmentby | Parameter | 
| timescaledb.orderby  | timescaledb.compress_orderby | Parameter | 
```

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.18.0 (2025-01-23)

This release introduces the ability to add secondary indexes to the columnstore, improves group by and filtering performance through columnstore vectorization, and contains the highly upvoted community request of transition table support. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

> **Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.17.0**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.18.0**
```

* #7587: Add `include_tiered_data` parameter to `add_continuous_aggregate_policy` API.
* #7486: Prevent building against PostgreSQL versions with broken ABI.
* #7412: Add [GUC](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/acronyms.html#:~:text=GUC) for the `hypercore_use_access_method` default.
* #7413: Add GUC for segmentwise recompression.

**Bugfixes**
* #7378: Remove obsolete job referencing `policy_job_error_retention`.
* #7409: Update `bgw_job` table when altering procedure.
* #7410: Fix the `aggregated compressed column not found` error on aggregation query.
* #7426: Fix `datetime` parsing error in chunk constraint creation.
* #7432: Verify that the heap tuple is valid before using.
* #7434: Fix the segfault when internally setting the replica identity for a given chunk.
* #7488: Emit error for transition table trigger on chunks.
* #7514: Fix the error: `invalid child of chunk append`.
* #7517: Fix the performance regression on the `cagg_migrate` procedure.
* #7527: Restart scheduler on error.
* #7557: Fix null handling for in-memory tuple filtering.
* #7566: Improve transaction check in CAGG refresh.
* #7584: Fix NaN-handling for vectorized aggregation.

> * #7598: Match the Postgres NaN comparison behavior in WHERE clause over compressed tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #7598: Match the PostgreSQL NaN comparison behavior in WHERE clause over compressed tables.
```
